hi I'm astronomy magazine associate
editor bill andrews welcome to tour the
solar system in this series we give you
an overview of the objects in our
stellar neighborhood this video focuses
on Neptune the most distant planet from
the Sun yes despite the objections of
fervent Pluto files the International
Astronomical unions demotion of Pluto to
dwarf planet status in 2006 means
Neptune once again has become the
farthest planet it's a distinction the
planet already held for 84 years between
its discovery in 1846 and Pluto's in
1930 and again for another 20 years from
nineteen seventy nine to nineteen ninety
nine when Pluto's eccentric orbit put it
inside neptune's orbit Neptune lies
about 2.8 billion miles or 4.5 billion
kilometres from the Sun on average and
it's some 31,000 miles or 50,000
kilometers wide about four times as big
across as Earth a day on Neptune last
just over 16 hours and a year there
takes almost a hundred and sixty-five
earth years because of its distinctive
deep blue coloring Neptune was named
after the Roman god of water and the sea
but don't be fooled that pleasing hue
comes not from vast oceans of liquid
water but rather an atmosphere of
hydrogen helium and some methane under
certain atmospheric conditions white
clouds can appear likely made up of
ammonia water and hydrogen sulfide
Neptune's atmosphere also features some
familiar characteristics cloud bands
like the belts and zones circling Saturn
and Jupiter as well as tremendous storms
like Jupiter's big red spot in 1989
voyager 2 observed the great dark spot
on Neptune's southern hemisphere however
unlike the Jovian big red spot Hubble
observations just five years later
revealed that the great dark spot had
disappeared and that a new one now
raised in the northern hemisphere
rumors are still unable to fully explain
Neptune's quick changing atmosphere also
helping set Neptune apart is its ring
system sometimes visible and
ground-based observations and sometimes
not the voyager 2 mission confirmed that
at least five rings wrap around the
planet the outermost one is named after
John couch Adams the British
mathematician and astronomer who
predicted the existence and position of
Neptune in 1845 this odd ring divides
itself into regions of significantly
higher density called arcs this is the
only known instance of such an
occurrence and it is these clumps that
make the rings only occasionally
detectable from Earth Neptune's biggest
moon Triton has also been a frequent
object of study it's the only known
large moon to have a retrograde orbit
meaning it orbits in the opposite
direction that Neptune does this implies
it's a captured member of the Kuiper
belt a region of various bodies orbiting
farther out Triton is also one of the
few known moons to have any geological
activity and it's one of only four known
to have an atmosphere the others being
Saturn's Titan and Jupiter's Io and
Europa astronomers have observed changes
occurring on Triton surface over the
years likely linked to its changing
seasons observant viewers or anyone who
will read the credits might notice that
the bulk of our information on Neptune
comes from the voyager 2 probe which
passed by several decades ago
unfortunately Neptune's vast distance
from us makes it a difficult object to
explore astronomers plan to learn more
by studying the planet telescopically I
hope you've enjoyed this overview of the
eighth planet one of my personal
favorites will continue our tour of the
solar system in upcoming videos make
sure you check out issues of astronomy
magazine too which often include news
and articles about solar system objects
see you next time
you